Product Recommendation System Design for ECommerce
Overview of the Recommendation Engine
Designing a recommendation system for ~75,000 products requires balancing personalization with the
cold-start problem. We must generate 5 relevant product recommendations for each user, adapting
to two distinct segments: (1) Loyal customers with rich purchase history, and (2) New customers with
little or no history. The engine will leverage historical transaction data (purchase logs with user IDs, item
IDs, timestamps, prices, etc.) and apply different algorithms per segment to ensure relevant
suggestions. We aim for an approach that is industry-proven, scalable to large data, and can be served
via a REST API with clear, maintainable code.
Key challenges include: data sparsity for new users, scalability to handle many users/items in realtime,
and aligning recommendations with business goals (e.g. not hurting revenue or user experience).
Leading e-commerce companies like Amazon and Netflix have demonstrated that highly personalized
recommendations yield dramatically higher click-through and conversion rates compared to nonpersonalized
content . Our solution will draw upon such industry best practices (collaborative
filtering, hybrid methods, etc.) and research-backed techniques to address these challenges.
Personalized Recommendations for Loyal Customers
For users with substantial purchase history, we will employ collaborative filtering (CF) to drive
personalization. Collaborative filtering utilizes the wisdom of the crowd – it assumes that users with
similar purchase patterns will prefer similar products, or alternatively, that products often bought
together or by similar users are related. This segment can benefit from the full power of CF since we
have data on their past behavior.
1. Collaborative Filtering Approach: We consider both neighborhood-based methods and modelbased
methods:
Item-Item Collaborative Filtering: This technique (famously used by Amazon) finds items
similar to what the user has purchased before, rather than finding similar users . For each
item a loyal user bought, the algorithm precomputes a list of “similar” items (based on copurchases
or similar customer behavior) and then aggregates those to recommend the top 5 not
yet purchased . This scales well because the expensive similarity calculations are done offline;
at runtime, recommending is fast (just lookup of similar items) . Item-based CF is also
naturally suited for e-commerce “customers who bought X also bought Y” suggestions.
User-User Collaborative Filtering: This finds users with similar purchase histories and
recommends items that those similar users liked. While conceptually straightforward, userbased
CF can be computationally heavier in large-scale environments because finding nearestneighbor
users in an ever-growing user base is costly . Additionally, very loyal customers
might not have exact “twins” among others if their tastes are unique.
1
•
2
2
3
•
3
1
Matrix Factorization (Latent Factor Models): To capture each user’s preferences in a more
compact form, we can use matrix factorization (e.g. SVD or ALS algorithms). This approach was a
key breakthrough in the Netflix Prize – “matrix factorization models are superior to classic nearestneighbor
techniques for producing product recommendations” . The idea is to learn latent
features for users and items from the user–item purchase matrix, so that a user’s predicted
affinity for any product can be estimated by the dot product of their feature vectors. Matrix
factorization can incorporate implicit feedback (purchases viewed as positive signals) and even
account for confidence levels based on frequency or recency . The trade-off is that it
requires a training phase, but it often generalizes better and can uncover subtle patterns (e.g.
recommending a new product that the user hasn’t bought but is similar in latent taste profile to
their history).
Justification: For loyal customers, personalization is crucial – these users expect the site to “know”
their tastes. Collaborative filtering directly leverages their demonstrated preferences to pick relevant
products. Amazon reports that its personalization algorithm can essentially reconfigure the storefront
for each user, showing content highly relevant to their interests (e.g. a software engineer sees
programming books, a new mother sees baby toys) . We will likely implement an item-item CF as
the primary method (due to its real-time efficiency and proven quality ), possibly enhanced with a
latent factor model in the background for improved accuracy. In practice, a hybrid of item-based and
matrix factorization can be used: for example, use matrix factorization to learn embeddings and
compute a broad relevance score, but also use item-item co-occurrence for fine-tuning and explaining
recommendations. This combination ensures scalability and accuracy – as seen in the Netflix Prizewinning
solutions which ensembled numerous models for best results .
Handling Data: The purchase logs will be transformed into a user-item interaction matrix. Because we
are dealing with implicit feedback (purchases, not explicit ratings), we might assign a positive signal for
each purchase. If quantity or frequency is provided (e.g. Units Sold), we can weigh those interactions
higher to indicate stronger interest. We will also time-weight interactions if needed – giving recent
purchases more influence to reflect evolving user tastes. This is important since loyal customers’
preferences can drift over time (e.g. a user’s style this year might differ from two years ago). Modern
recommender research suggests accounting for temporal dynamics improves accuracy .
Algorithm Choice: A practical algorithm is Alternating Least Squares (ALS) for implicit data, which
scales to large datasets and runs in parallel (implemented in libraries like Spark’s MLlib and implicit
in Python). ALS factorizes the matrix while treating all unpurchased items as negative examples with
lower confidence. This algorithm has been used in industry for its scalability. For example, OLX (online
marketplace) mentions using ALS for item-to-item recommendations based on co-viewed items . We
will train such a model on the loyal customers’ data to learn latent representations of users and
products.
Output for Loyal Users: The result will be a personalized Top-5 list of products the user is most likely
to buy next. These can be accompanied by a relevance score (for instance, the predicted purchase
affinity). Because the recommendations stem from the user’s own history, we expect high relevance. We
will also include a confidence score in the output – for loyal users, confidence can be relatively high,
especially if the user has plenty of past data. (In matrix factorization, confidence could be derived from
how many interactions support a recommendation . In item-based CF, confidence might come
from the similarity strength – e.g. if multiple past items all point to the same recommended item with
high similarity, the system is more confident).
•
4
4 5
1
6
4
7 8
9
5 10
2
Cold-Start Recommendations for New Customers
New customers (or users with very sparse data) present a cold-start problem: with little or no historical
data, collaborative filtering has nothing to work with . We need alternative strategies to
recommend 5 meaningful products to these users. This often involves using population-level or
content-based techniques until the user generates enough data to switch to the personalized model
.
Our approach for new customers includes a combination of popular items, user clustering, and
product-similarity methods:
Popular & Trending Items: A common baseline is to recommend generally popular products
(top sellers or trending now) to new users . This ensures the recommendations are at least
broadly appealing and well-rated products. For an absolutely new visitor with no interactions,
this is the safest option – many real systems show bestsellers or new & trending items by default
for first-time users. This addresses the cold start until we get some signal of the user’s
preferences. We can refine this by context (for example, if we know the user’s geolocation or
device, we might surface items popular in that region or optimized for mobile shoppers, similar
to how Netflix includes what’s popular in the user’s locale ).
Content-Based or Attribute-Based Recommendations: Content-based filtering uses item
information (like category, description, brand, price, etc.) to find similar items to something the
user has shown interest in . In our scenario, explicit product attributes are minimal (the
dataset only lists price and product ID; we lack descriptions or categories). However, we do have
price, which can serve as a proxy for product segment (budget vs premium). We could cluster
products by price range or treat price as a feature in a hybrid model. Incorporating price
similarity can make recommendations more relevant for new users by aligning with their
apparent budget – research shows that integrating price sensitivity can significantly improve
conversion and revenue . For instance, if a new customer’s first interaction is viewing or
buying a low-cost item, the system can recommend other popular low-cost items (rather than
expensive ones), thereby matching the user’s price preference.
“Users Like You” Segmentation: If any browsing data or minimal purchase data is available
for the new user, we can perform a rudimentary clustering. For example, group users by the first
product they purchased or the first few pages they viewed. Netflix uses a form of this by
grouping users with similar behavior and even factoring in location to recommend regionally
popular content . In e-commerce, if a new user browsed product X, we might assume they
share interests with other users who browsed or bought X. Thus, we could recommend items
that those similar users eventually purchased. This is akin to a cluster model: place the new user
into a “neighborhoood” defined by an item or category, and recommend the top items popular in
that neighborhood . This approach was suggested in the prompt (clustering users based on
browsing/product patterns) and helps cold-start users get something relevant faster than just
global top-sellers.
Item-to-Item Similarity (for sparse interactions): Another tactic: if a new user shows interest
in even one product (by viewing or buying it), switch the task to an item similarity search. For
example, on that product’s page, show a “similar items” carousel. This can be powered by content
(if we had textual attributes) or by item embedding techniques. One modern approach is
Item2Vec/Prod2Vec, which learns vector embeddings for products by treating sequences of
products in user sessions or carts like sentences . With Item2Vec, we can find nearest-
11 12
13
•
14
15
•
16
17 18
•
15
13
•
19 20
3
neighbor products in vector space – effectively a learned content+collaborative hybrid similarity.
Yahoo researchers introduced Prod2Vec (and a similar approach by Microsoft called Item2Vec) to
map items into a semantic space based on co-purchase contexts . These methods
outperform simple co-occurrence in finding related items, though pure versions still suffer if the
item is brand new with no data . In our case, if the new user has interacted with item X, we
can fetch the top 5 nearest vectors to X (which represent items frequently bought together or by
similar customers) as recommendations. This yields “because you looked at X, you might like Y”
suggestions even with a single interaction.
Hybrid Strategy: In practice, a hybrid recommendation strategy will be used for new customers .
This might involve combining the above methods in a weighted manner. For example, the system might
start by recommending popular items (with a diversity spread across categories for coverage). As soon
as the user clicks an item or adds something to cart, the engine can blend in item-similarity
recommendations for that specific interest. If the user provided any profile info (not mentioned here,
but e.g. demographic or explicitly stated preferences), a content-based filter could utilize that too .
The goal is to “bridge the gap” until the user generates enough data to be treated as a loyal customer for
collaborative filtering .
Justification: Solving cold start often requires creative use of whatever data is available beyond the
user’s own history. By using popularity and broad trends, we ensure the new user sees high-quality,
widely liked products (a reasonable guess of interest) . By using clustering or item-similarity, we
inject some personalization based on early behavior, which can significantly improve relevance once we
have even tiny signals. This hybrid approach is aligned with industry practice – many real-world systems
deploy a non-personalized recommender as a fallback for new users/items , then seamlessly
transition to personalized models. Content-based elements ensure that even with zero collaborative
data we can make an educated recommendation, as content methods “serve well as a fallback when
collaborative filtering fails” . We acknowledge that recommendations for new users will have lower
confidence than for loyal users – the system will indicate this via a confidence score. For instance, an
item recommended purely because it’s globally popular might get a moderate confidence (since it
wasn’t personalized), whereas an item recommended due to a strong similarity to something the user
just viewed might have a higher confidence (as it directly matches their immediate interest).
Algorithm Selection and Trade-offs
Why Collaborative Filtering for Loyal Users? CF directly uses user behavior data to find patterns,
which is ideal for personalization. It has a strong track record in e-commerce: Amazon’s item-to-item
CF algorithm is known for producing high-quality recommendations in real-time at massive scale .
Meanwhile, Netflix’s success in the Netflix Prize showed that latent factor models can dramatically
improve accuracy over simple neighbor methods . We will leverage these insights by possibly
combining approaches: e.g., use an item-based CF for fast updates (since new transactions can
update item similarity counts on the fly), and matrix factorization for improved recommendation
quality as a batch process. The trade-off here is between accuracy and scalability. Item-based CF is
very scalable (computation grows with number of items and purchases, but not directly with number of
users at query time) . Matrix factorization offers accuracy and the ability to incorporate additional
factors (time, confidence, etc.) , at the cost of a more complex training pipeline. By separating
concerns (offline training vs online serving), we can achieve both: precompute models offline, then
serve recommendations quickly online.
Why a Hybrid/Cluster Approach for New Users? No single method suffices for cold start. Pure CF is
unusable with no data; pure content/popularity can be too generic. We choose a hybrid to get “the best
20
21
22
23
24
14
13
25
6
4
26
4
4
of both worlds” . For example, content-based filtering alone may not help users discover new or
unexpected products , but collaborative signals (even at a cohort level) can introduce novelty.
Conversely, CF alone fails initially, but content or popularity fills that gap . Thus, the strategy is to
start broad then narrow down: use popularity and basic segmentation first, then quickly infuse
whatever personal signal we get. This mirrors how Netflix and others handle new users – often asking
for a few preferred genres or using location-based popular items as initial recommendations . Our
approach does similarly but implicitly, via browsing triggers and general trends.
Incorporating Business Goals: A noteworthy consideration is aligning recommendations with business
metrics like revenue. A purely relevance-optimized model might, for instance, always recommend the
cheapest related items because the user is most likely to buy them, but that could reduce overall
revenue. To address this, we may incorporate constraints or features such as price. Recent industry
research demonstrated that adding price-awareness to recommendations increased revenue by ~5.5% in
an A/B test, whereas a CF-only approach reduced revenue by ~5% . This insight guides us to
include business rules or weighted objectives – for example, among equally relevant items, favor
those in a similar price bracket to what the user usually spends (to respect their budget) or slightly
higher (to enable upselling), depending on strategy. We will justify algorithm choices not only on
accuracy, but also on such trade-offs (e.g., a small sacrifice in click-through for a big gain in profit might
be acceptable, or vice versa if user satisfaction is the priority).
Summary of Techniques and Resources: To implement these recommendations effectively, we will
draw on existing libraries and models. For collaborative filtering, there are robust open-source libraries
like Surprise (scikit-surprise) for quick prototypes or implicit for scalable implicit ALS. For advanced
modeling, frameworks such as TensorFlow Recommenders or PyTorch can be used to build neural CF
(like Neural Collaborative Filtering models ). If sequential patterns are important, one could even
explore Transformer-based models (e.g. BERT4Rec for next-item prediction) which are available via
libraries like Transformers4Rec – though these might be overkill for our task given limited product
meta-data. On the cold-start side, we might utilize simple clustering algorithms (k-means on user
behavior vectors), or precompute item similarity with distance metrics (cosine similarity on item
embeddings, possibly using a tool like FAISS for efficient nearest-neighbor search if needed). The
solution is designed such that we can start simple (item-based CF + popularity) and later incorporate
more sophisticated models as enhancements. This modularity ensures the system is future-proof and
can evolve with additional data or new algorithms.
System Implementation (REST API & Architecture)
We will now outline the implementation deliverables: a RESTful API that serves recommendations, and
the underlying system architecture ensuring production-quality code, scalability, and maintainability.
1. Architecture & Components: We will structure the project with clear separation of concerns:
Data Layer: Responsible for data ingestion and storage. This could be a simple ETL that reads
the provided Google Sheet (or database dumps of it) and transforms it into usable datasets (e.g.
CSV or a database of transactions). The data layer will produce artifacts like the user-item
interaction matrix or item similarity index. In a production setting, this might connect to a data
warehouse or streaming pipeline to get the latest transactions.
Model Training Pipeline: This is an offline batch process that trains our recommendation
models. One part will compute the item-item similarities (for item-based CF) by analyzing copurchases
or co-views. Another part will train the matrix factorization model on historical data
27
28
23
15
29 30
31
32
•
•
5
(if we go with ALS or similar). We will schedule this pipeline to run periodically (e.g. nightly or
hourly) to incorporate new data. The output of training could be:
A database or cache of top-N similar items for each item (for quick item-based lookup).
A set of learned user and item feature vectors (for matrix factorization).
Any other needed structures, such as a list of global top items (for the popularity baseline)
updated over a recent window.
We will also generate any auxiliary data for cold start: for instance, a list of top items by category or
price segment (if we had category info, or by price buckets), so that we can recommend “popular in
Electronics” if we know a new user is browsing electronics, etc. Since we only know price from the
dataset, we could pre-bucket items into, say, low/medium/high price tertiles and keep track of popular
products in each bucket.
Recommendation Engine (Core Logic): This will be implemented as a module or class (e.g.
RecommenderService ) that loads the outputs of the training pipeline and provides a method
like get_recommendations(user_id) which returns the 5 products with scores. This core will
encapsulate the logic described:
Determine if the user is loyal or new (for example, we could maintain a set or count of how many
purchases each user has; if below a threshold, treat as new).
If loyal: fetch user’s past data or latent profile and compute recommendations. In practice, with
item-based CF we would:
Retrieve all items the user purchased.
For each, fetch precomputed similar items.
Aggregate those candidates (perhaps summing similarity scores from multiple of the
user’s items) .
Exclude any items the user already bought (to avoid redundant recommendations).
Rank the remaining by aggregated score and take the top 5. The aggregated score can
serve as the "relevance score".
Optionally, incorporate the MF model by adding its predicted rating for the user-item as
an additional signal to sort or filter the candidates.
If new: apply the cold-start strategy:
If the user has absolutely no interaction (e.g., first call ever for this user):
Return a mix of top popular products (e.g. top 5 overall, or diversified across different
categories if possible for variety).
These recommendations will have a generic relevance score (we could just use a
popularity index, like sales rank, as the score).
Confidence might be tagged lower (since we have no personal data; this is a “one-size-fitsall”
suggestion).
If the user has some minimal interaction (maybe they browsed or bought 1-2 items but
not enough to be “loyal” yet):
Use a similar items approach: take the last item they interacted with and find similar
items (from the item similarity index or item embedding space).
Also consider items that other users with similar initial behavior bought. For example, if
this user bought item X and nothing else, find users who also bought X as a first purchase
and see what else they bought later – those else items are good candidates.
We can blend a couple of these strategies: 2-3 recommendations based on item similarity
to X, plus 2-3 based on global popularity or segment popularity, ensuring we still show
some variety.
The relevance score here might be the similarity score or a weighted combination (if we
blend sources, we’ll normalize scores).
•
•
•
•
•
•
◦
◦
◦
2
◦
◦
◦
•
◦
◦
◦
◦
◦
◦
◦
◦
◦
6
The confidence score for these can be moderate – higher than the pure cold-start case
because we do have a hint (e.g. “User looked at X, and we’re recommending Y because it's
similar to X” is somewhat justified).
Note: All these computations will be efficient because we rely on precomputed data. For
example, looking up similar items to X is O(1) or O(log N) if stored in a hash or database by item
key. Aggregating a user’s item recommendations is O(K * M) where K is number of items the
user purchased (for loyal users) and M is the number of top similars we store per item (which we
can limit, say top 50 similars each). These are manageable given even very loyal users rarely
purchase thousands of distinct items in our scenario.
REST API Layer: This will be a lightweight web service (e.g. using FastAPI or Flask in Python, or
a Node/Express service, etc.) that exposes an endpoint like GET /recommendations?
user_id=<ID> . The API handler will:
Parse the user_id from the request.
Validate it (if not provided or not a valid format, return an error response with 400 Bad Request).
Call the RecommenderService.get_recommendations(user_id) core logic.
If the user_id does not exist in our data:
We treat it as a new user by default (as above, return popular items). We will not throw an
error for unknown users; instead we handle it gracefully by still providing
recommendations (this is important for user experience – a new signup should still see
something, not an error).
Format the result into JSON with the required fields. For example:
{
"user_id": "12345",
"recommendations": [
{"item_id": "A1B2C3", "relevance_score": 0.87, "confidence": 0.95},
{"item_id": "X9Y8Z7", "relevance_score": 0.75, "confidence": 0.90},
...
]
}
Each product has a relevance score (e.g. a similarity or predicted rating scaled to [0,1]) and a
confidence score. We will ensure these scores are interpretable – for instance, confidence could
be a function of how many data points contributed to that recommendation or the system’s
estimated certainty. As discussed, confidence for loyal users might be high (we have lots of data
backing the suggestion), whereas for a brand-new user receiving popular items, we might set
confidence lower to indicate it's a generic guess .
Return the JSON response with HTTP 200. If something goes wrong internally (exception, etc.),
return a 500 with an error message.
Error Handling & Edge Cases: The system will handle edge cases like:
User ID is missing or malformed (return a clear error message).
User exists but has no purchases yet (this essentially is the new user case, handled by showing
default recommendations).
◦
•
•
•
•
•
•
◦
•
5 10
•
•
•
•
7
If for some reason the recommendation core returns fewer than 5 items (perhaps due to
excluding items the user already owns in a niche scenario), the API can fallback to adding some
popular items to pad the list so that it always returns 5 items.
If the model data hasn’t been generated yet (e.g. just after deployment and no training run has
happened), the system may initially rely on popularity until the model is ready – ensuring no
downtime in recommendations.
The API should also be secure (if needed, with auth on the endpoint in a real system) and not
expose internal IDs unintentionally (we will assume user_id and item_id are okay to use as
they are likely anonymized or non-sensitive IDs).
2. Code Quality and Maintainability: We will enforce clean code practices: - Use a modular project
structure: e.g. data_preprocessing.py , train_model.py , recommendation_service.py ,
api.py , etc. Each module has a single responsibility. - Use classes to encapsulate behavior. For
instance, an ItemBasedRecommender class with a method train(data) to compute similarities,
and a method recommend(user_history) to output recommendations. Similarly, perhaps a
MatrixFactorizationRecommender class for the MF approach. Then a higher-level
HybridRecommender can decide which one to use based on user segment. - Ensure the code is welldocumented
with docstrings explaining the methods and assumptions. - Write unit tests for the core
recommendation logic (e.g. test that a known user with a simple history gets the expected
recommendations, test that a new user gets popular items, test that the merge of candidates works
without duplicates, etc.). - Configuration (like number of recommendations, thresholds for loyal vs new,
paths to model files) will be externalized in a config file or environment variables, not hard-coded, to
allow easy tuning. - The system will be built with scalability in mind: for instance, if the number of users
grows, we can deploy the recommender service behind a load balancer. We might also consider caching
recommendations for each user for a short time (say if the same user requests multiple times, to avoid
recomputation within a session – though if our logic is fast, this may not be needed). We will also
consider asynchronous updating: e.g., if a user just made a purchase, we might update their
recommendations in the background so the next API call reflects it. The architecture (with separate
training pipeline and service) allows us to update models without disrupting the live API (e.g., load new
model files into memory atomically).
3. Performance Considerations: In e-commerce, latency is critical – recommendations may be shown
on the homepage or product page, and must render quickly. Our item-item CF approach supports realtime
queries easily . We will ensure the API can return results well under the 500ms threshold that
Amazon cites as necessary for web interactions . Using in-memory data structures (like a dictionary
of item similarities, or a Redis cache for quick lookups) can achieve sub-millisecond retrieval for each
lookup. If we use a vector model for items, we might use an approximate nearest neighbor index (like
Faiss or even ElasticSearch’s vector search) to get similar items quickly – the MDPI study, for instance,
deployed their hybrid model with Elasticsearch and Redis for speed at scale . In our design, after the
initial training, the online component is essentially lookup and merge, which is very fast.
We will also monitor the system’s suggestions and possibly log the outcomes (did the user click a
recommended item? purchase it?). These logs become feedback to further improve the model offline.
This continuous improvement loop is something companies like Netflix emphasize – they use A/B
testing and engagement metrics to refine their algorithms . In our context, we might not implement
A/B testing in code, but it’s a consideration for evaluating different recommendation strategies (e.g. we
could test item-based CF vs. MF hybrid and see which yields better user engagement or sales).
•
•
•
33
34
35
36
8
Industry Examples and Relevant Resources
To ensure our solution is in line with state-of-the-art, we researched existing systems and models:
Amazon.com: Pioneered e-commerce recommendations with item-to-item collaborative filtering
. Amazon’s system compares each customer’s purchased items to similar items, producing
real-time personalized storefronts. Notably, Amazon’s algorithm is known to generate about 35%
of total sales via recommendations (“Customers who bought this also bought…” and
other widgets). We take inspiration from Amazon’s focus on scalable, fast item similarity
calculations and combining multiple data sources (purchases, views, ratings, etc.) for
personalization .
Netflix: Although a media context, Netflix’s approach to recommendations illustrates the power
of hybrid models. Netflix does not rely on a single algorithm; instead, it uses an ensemble of
collaborative filtering, ranking algorithms, and business rules, all tuned via extensive A/B testing
. For example, Netflix will use your viewing history, but also consider what's popular in your
region and device, and even the time of day, to choose what to show . This emphasizes
that a one-size-fits-all algorithm is not enough – we likely need multiple techniques for
different scenarios, which is exactly how we structured the loyal vs. new strategies. Netflix also
reported that 75% of what users watch comes from recommendations , underscoring the
business value of a well-tuned recommender system.
Research and Open Source: We identified relevant research papers and tools:
Matrix Factorization Techniques for Recsys (Koren et al. 2009) – foundational paper that
introduced time dynamics and implicit feedback handling in MF . This guides our use of
implicit ALS and time-aware modeling for loyal users.
Amazon’s Item-to-item CF (Linden et al. 2003) – introduced a method that “scales
independently of the number of customers” and produces high-quality recommendations in realtime
. Our item-based component is aligned with this approach.
Cold-start Solutions: Academic literature suggests hybrid approaches (combining CF with
content or using predefined defaults) to tackle new users . For instance, Schein et al. (2002)
and others have shown that mixing collaborative and content-based methods can effectively
bridge the cold-start period . We also note recent approaches like using social network data
or asking new users for a few preferences upfront – in our case, we don't have social data
and we assume we cannot query the user directly in an automated way, so our solution sticks to
implicit methods like popularity and browsing-based clusters.
Item2Vec and Neural Embeddings: Techniques from companies like Yahoo and Microsoft
(Prod2Vec/Item2Vec) and Avito have applied word2vec-inspired models to product sequences
. These help recommend related items and are particularly useful for item cold-start
(when a brand new item is introduced) by incorporating item content into the embedding. While
our task is more about user cold-start, we mention these to highlight the direction of modern
recommender systems – they increasingly use deep learning to create richer representations of
items and users. Libraries like HuggingFace’s Transformers4Rec and NVIDIA Merlin provide
frameworks to experiment with such models, which could be future enhancements once basic
approaches are in place.
GitHub Resources: There are many open-source implementations of e-commerce
recommenders for reference. For example, Microsoft’s Recommenders repository offers
examples of algorithms like ALS, content-based filtering, and even deep learning models applied
to recommendation scenarios. Another example is the LightFM library (by L. Kula) which is a
•
6
37 38
39
•
40
15 41
42
•
•
4
•
6
•
13
23
13
•
20 43
•
9
hybrid matrix factorization model that can incorporate item and user features – this could be
directly relevant if we had metadata like product category or user demographics (not in our
dataset, but worth noting for extensibility). These resources confirm that our chosen methods
(ALS, item-item CF, hybrid strategies) are standard and have support in the community.
In summary, our proposed recommendation system is thoroughly grounded in industry standards
and research. We leverage collaborative filtering for its personalization strength, with proven
methods from Amazon and Netflix as guiding examples. We tackle the cold-start problem with a
hybrid approach, as recommended by literature and practiced by companies (mixing popularity,
clustering, and content similarity). The deliverables include a clear methodology document (as
outlined above), and a plan for a robust REST API implementation that returns the desired outputs (5
products with relevance and confidence scores), all built with production-ready code structure. By
following this plan, we aim to deliver a recommendation engine that is both effective for end-users and
maintainable for developers, satisfying the technical interview requirements and demonstrating deep
understanding of recommendation systems in an e-commerce context.
Sources: The approach and justifications above are supported by established research and real-world
case studies, including Amazon’s seminal paper on item-item CF , Netflix’s published recommender
system overview , hybrid recommendation research for cold start , and modern enhancements
like price-aware recommendations and neural embedding methods . These references (and
others cited in-line) provide further reading and evidence for the techniques we chose.
Amazon.com recommendations item-to-item collaborative filtering -
Internet Computing, IEEE
https://www.cs.umd.edu/~samir/498/Amazon-Recommendations.pdf
datajobs.com
https://datajobs.com/data-science-repo/Recommender-Systems-[Netflix].pdf
Item2Vec: Neural Item Embeddings to enhance recommendations | by Ilia
Ivanov | OLX Engineering
https://tech.olx.com/item2vec-neural-item-embeddings-to-enhance-recommendations-1fd948a6f293?gi=02161df1da82
The Continuous Cold Start Problem in e-Commerce Recommender Systems
https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1448/paper6.pdf
Ecommerce Recommendation Engine: Best Options + Examples
https://www.bigcommerce.com/articles/ecommerce/recommendation-engine/
A Hybrid Recommendation System Based on Similar-Price Content in a Large-Scale ECommerce
Environment
https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/15/19/10758
[PDF] Neural Collaborative Filtering - Semantic Scholar
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Neural-Collaborative-Filtering-He-Liao/
ad42c33c299ef1c53dfd4697e3f7f98ed0ca31dd
Why Transformers4Rec?
https://nvidia-merlin.github.io/Transformers4Rec/stable/why_transformers4rec.html
TMIS0604-13
https://ailab-ua.github.io/courses/resources/netflix_recommender_system_tmis_2015.pdf